<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Acknowledgments</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:232c2138-be82-42d4-8a6b-b460372314a4" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

  


<link href="../../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../../4bgup-l038f.html">Effective Java, Third Edition
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Joshua Bloch

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="preface.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="ch1.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
      
      <h2 class="h2f" id="acknowledgments"><a id="page_xvii" class="calibre4"></a><strong class="calibre10">Acknowledgments</strong></h2>
      
      <h3 class="h3a"><strong class="calibre10">Acknowledgments for the Third Edition</strong></h3>
      
      <p class="noindent"><strong class="calibre11">I</strong> thank the readers of the first two editions of this book for giving it such a kind
         and enthusiastic reception, for taking its ideas to heart, and for letting me know
         what a positive influence it had on them and their work. I thank the many professors
         who used the book in their courses, and the many engineering teams that adopted it.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I thank the whole team at Addison-Wesley and Pearson for their kindness, professionalism,
         patience, and grace under extreme pressure. Through it all, my editor Greg Doench
         remained unflappable: a fine editor and a perfect gentleman. I’m afraid his hair may
         have turned a bit gray as a result of this project, and I humbly apologize. My project
         manager, Julie Nahil, and my project editor, Dana Wilson, were all I could hope for:
         diligent, prompt, organized, and friendly. My copy editor, Kim Wimpsett, was meticulous
         and tasteful.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I have yet again been blessed with the best team of reviewers imaginable, and I give
         my sincerest thanks to each of them. The core team, who reviewed most every chapter,
         consisted of Cindy Bloch, Brian Kernighan, Kevin Bourrillion, Joe Bowbeer, William
         Chargin, Joe Darcy, Brian Goetz, Tim Halloran, Stuart Marks, Tim Peierls, and Yoshiki
         Shibata, Other reviewers included Marcus Biel, Dan Bloch, Beth Bottos, Martin Buchholz,
         Michael Diamond, Charlie Garrod, Tom Hawtin, Doug Lea, Aleksey Shipilëv, Lou Wasserman,
         and Peter Weinberger. These reviewers made numerous suggestions that led to great
         improvements in this book and saved me from many embarrassments.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I give special thanks to William Chargin, Doug Lea, and Tim Peierls, who served as
         sounding boards for many of the ideas in this book. William, Doug, and Tim were unfailingly
         generous with their time and knowledge.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">Finally, I thank my wife, Cindy Bloch, for encouraging me to write, for reading each
         item in raw form, for writing the index, for helping me with all of the things that
         invariably come up when you take on a big project, and for putting up with me while
         I wrote.
      </p>
      
      <h3 class="h3a"><a id="page_xviii" class="calibre4"></a><strong class="calibre10">Acknowledgments for the Second Edition</strong></h3>
      
      <p class="noindent">I thank the readers of the first edition of this book for giving it such a kind and
         enthusiastic reception, for taking its ideas to heart, and for letting me know what
         a positive influence it had on them and their work. I thank the many professors who
         used the book in their courses, and the many engineering teams that adopted it.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I thank the whole team at Addison-Wesley for their kindness, professionalism, patience,
         and grace under pressure. Through it all, my editor Greg Doench remained unflappable:
         a fine editor and a perfect gentleman. My production manager, Julie Nahil, was everything
         that a production manager should be: diligent, prompt, organized, and friendly. My
         copy editor, Barbara Wood, was meticulous and tasteful.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I have once again been blessed with the best team of reviewers imaginable, and I give
         my sincerest thanks to each of them. The core team, who reviewed every chapter, consisted
         of Lexi Baugher, Cindy Bloch, Beth Bottos, Joe Bowbeer, Brian Goetz, Tim Halloran,
         Brian Kernighan, Rob Konigsberg, Tim Peierls, Bill Pugh, Yoshiki Shibata, Peter Stout,
         Peter Weinberger, and Frank Yellin. Other reviewers included Pablo Bellver, Dan Bloch,
         Dan Bornstein, Kevin Bourrillion, Martin Buchholz, Joe Darcy, Neal Gafter, Laurence
         Gonsalves, Aaron Greenhouse, Barry Hayes, Peter Jones, Angelika Langer, Doug Lea,
         Bob Lee, Jeremy Manson, Tom May, Mike McCloskey, Andriy Tereshchenko, and Paul Tyma.
         Again, these reviewers made numerous suggestions that led to great improvements in
         this book and saved me from many embarrassments. And again, any remaining embarrassments
         are my responsibility.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I give special thanks to Doug Lea and Tim Peierls, who served as sounding boards for
         many of the ideas in this book. Doug and Tim were unfailingly generous with their
         time and knowledge.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I thank my manager at Google, Prabha Krishna, for her continued support and encouragement.</p>
      
      <p class="indent">Finally, I thank my wife, Cindy Bloch, for encouraging me to write, for reading each
         item in raw form, for helping me with Framemaker, for writing the index, and for putting
         up with me while I wrote.
      </p>
      
      <h3 class="h3a"><a id="page_xix" class="calibre4"></a><strong class="calibre10">Acknowledgments for the First Edition</strong></h3>
      
      <p class="noindent">I thank Patrick Chan for suggesting that I write this book and for pitching the idea
         to Lisa Friendly, the series managing editor; Tim Lindholm, the series technical editor;
         and Mike Hendrickson, executive editor of Addison-Wesley. I thank Lisa, Tim, and Mike
         for encouraging me to pursue the project and for their superhuman patience and unyielding
         faith that I would someday write this book.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I thank James Gosling and his original team for giving me something great to write
         about, and I thank the many Java platform engineers who followed in James’s footsteps.
         In particular, I thank my colleagues in Sun’s Java Platform Tools and Libraries Group
         for their insights, their encouragement, and their support. The team consists of Andrew
         Bennett, Joe Darcy, Neal Gafter, Iris Garcia, Konstantin Kladko, Ian Little, Mike
         McCloskey, and Mark Reinhold. Former members include Zhenghua Li, Bill Maddox, and
         Naveen Sanjeeva.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I thank my manager, Andrew Bennett, and my director, Larry Abrahams, for lending their
         full and enthusiastic support to this project. I thank Rich Green, the VP of Engineering
         at Java Software, for providing an environment where engineers are free to think creatively
         and to publish their work.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I have been blessed with the best team of reviewers imaginable, and I give my sincerest
         thanks to each of them: Andrew Bennett, Cindy Bloch, Dan Bloch, Beth Bottos, Joe Bowbeer,
         Gilad Bracha, Mary Campione, Joe Darcy, David Eckhardt, Joe Fialli, Lisa Friendly,
         James Gosling, Peter Haggar, David Holmes, Brian Kernighan, Konstantin Kladko, Doug
         Lea, Zhenghua Li, Tim Lindholm, Mike McCloskey, Tim Peierls, Mark Reinhold, Ken Russell,
         Bill Shannon, Peter Stout, Phil Wadler, and two anonymous reviewers. They made numerous
         suggestions that led to great improvements in this book and saved me from many embarrassments.
         Any remaining embarrassments are my responsibility.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">Numerous colleagues, inside and outside Sun, participated in technical discussions
         that improved the quality of this book. Among others, Ben Gomes, Steffen Grarup, Peter
         Kessler, Richard Roda, John Rose, and David Stoutamire contributed useful insights.
         A special thanks is due Doug Lea, who served as a sounding board for many of the ideas
         in this book. Doug has been unfailingly generous with his time and his knowledge.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">I thank Julie Dinicola, Jacqui Doucette, Mike Hendrickson, Heather Olszyk, Tracy Russ,
         and the whole team at Addison-Wesley for their support and professionalism. Even under
         an impossibly tight schedule, they were always friendly and accommodating.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent"><a id="page_xx" class="calibre8"></a>I thank Guy Steele for writing the Foreword. I am honored that he chose to participate
         in this project.
      </p>
      
      <p class="indent">Finally, I thank my wife, Cindy Bloch, for encouraging and occasionally threatening
         me to write this book, for reading each item in its raw form, for helping me with
         Framemaker, for writing the index, and for putting up with me while I wrote.
      </p>
      
   
   


  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../../4bgup-l038f.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="cover.xhtml">Cover Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="pref00.xhtml">About This E-Book</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="title.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="copy.xhtml">Copyright Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ded.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="foreword.xhtml#foreword">Foreword</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="preface.xhtml#preface">Preface</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="acknowledgments.xhtml#acknowledgments">Acknowledgments</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch1.xhtml#ch1">1 Introduction</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch2.xhtml#ch2">2 Creating and Destroying Objects</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev1">Item 1: Consider static factory methods instead of constructors</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev2">Item 2: Consider a builder when faced with many constructor parameters</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev3">Item 3: Enforce the singleton property with a private constructor or an enum type</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev4">Item 4: Enforce noninstantiability with a private constructor</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev5">Item 5: Prefer dependency injection to hardwiring resources</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev6">Item 6: Avoid creating unnecessary objects</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev7">Item 7: Eliminate obsolete object references</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev8">Item 8: Avoid finalizers and cleaners</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch2.xhtml#lev9">Item 9: Prefer try-with-resources to try-finally</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch3.xhtml#ch3">3 Methods Common to All Objects</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch3.xhtml#lev10">Item 10: Obey the general contract when overriding equals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch3.xhtml#lev11">Item 11: Always override hashCode when you override equals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch3.xhtml#lev12">Item 12: Always override toString</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch3.xhtml#lev13">Item 13: Override clone judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch3.xhtml#lev14">Item 14: Consider implementing Comparable</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch4.xhtml#ch4">4 Classes and Interfaces</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev15">Item 15: Minimize the accessibility of classes and members</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev16">Item 16: In public classes, use accessor methods, not public fields</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev17">Item 17: Minimize mutability</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev18">Item 18: Favor composition over inheritance</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev19">Item 19: Design and document for inheritance or else prohibit it</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev20">Item 20: Prefer interfaces to abstract classes</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev21">Item 21: Design interfaces for posterity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev22">Item 22: Use interfaces only to define types</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev23">Item 23: Prefer class hierarchies to tagged classes</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev24">Item 24: Favor static member classes over nonstatic</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch4.xhtml#lev25">Item 25: Limit source files to a single top-level class</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch5.xhtml#ch5">5 Generics</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev26">Item 26: Don’t use raw types</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev27">Item 27: Eliminate unchecked warnings</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev28">Item 28: Prefer lists to arrays</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev29">Item 29: Favor generic types</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev30">Item 30: Favor generic methods</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev31">Item 31: Use bounded wildcards to increase API flexibility</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev32">Item 32: Combine generics and varargs judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch5.xhtml#lev33">Item 33: Consider typesafe heterogeneous containers</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch6.xhtml#ch6">6 Enums and Annotations</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev34">Item 34: Use enums instead of int constants</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev35">Item 35: Use instance fields instead of ordinals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev36">Item 36: Use EnumSet instead of bit fields</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev37">Item 37: Use EnumMap instead of ordinal indexing</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev38">Item 38: Emulate extensible enums with interfaces</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev39">Item 39: Prefer annotations to naming patterns</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev40">Item 40: Consistently use the Override annotation</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch6.xhtml#lev41">Item 41: Use marker interfaces to define types</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch7.xhtml#ch7">7 Lambdas and Streams</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev42">Item 42: Prefer lambdas to anonymous classes</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev43">Item 43: Prefer method references to lambdas</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev44">Item 44: Favor the use of standard functional interfaces</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev45">Item 45: Use streams judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev46">Item 46: Prefer side-effect-free functions in streams</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev47">Item 47: Prefer Collection to Stream as a return type</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch7.xhtml#lev48">Item 48: Use caution when making streams parallel</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch8.xhtml#ch8">8 Methods</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev49">Item 49: Check parameters for validity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev50">Item 50: Make defensive copies when needed</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev51">Item 51: Design method signatures carefully</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev52">Item 52: Use overloading judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev53">Item 53: Use varargs judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev54">Item 54: Return empty collections or arrays, not nulls</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev55">Item 55: Return optionals judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch8.xhtml#lev56">Item 56: Write doc comments for all exposed API elements</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch9.xhtml#ch9">9 General Programming</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev57">Item 57: Minimize the scope of local variables</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev58">Item 58: Prefer for-each loops to traditional for loops</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev59">Item 59: Know and use the libraries</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev60">Item 60: Avoid float and double if exact answers are required</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev61">Item 61: Prefer primitive types to boxed primitives</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev62">Item 62: Avoid strings where other types are more appropriate</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev63">Item 63: Beware the performance of string concatenation</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev64">Item 64: Refer to objects by their interfaces</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev65">Item 65: Prefer interfaces to reflection</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev66">Item 66: Use native methods judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev67">Item 67: Optimize judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch9.xhtml#lev68">Item 68: Adhere to generally accepted naming conventions</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch10.xhtml#ch10">10 Exceptions</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev69">Item 69: Use exceptions only for exceptional conditions</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev70">Item 70: Use checked exceptions for recoverable conditions and runtime exceptions for programming errors</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev71">Item 71: Avoid unnecessary use of checked exceptions</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev72">Item 72: Favor the use of standard exceptions</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev73">Item 73: Throw exceptions appropriate to the abstraction</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev74">Item 74: Document all exceptions thrown by each method</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev75">Item 75: Include failure-capture information in detail messages</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev76">Item 76: Strive for failure atomicity</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch10.xhtml#lev77">Item 77: Don’t ignore exceptions</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch11.xhtml#ch11">11 Concurrency</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev78">Item 78: Synchronize access to shared mutable data</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev79">Item 79: Avoid excessive synchronization</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev80">Item 80: Prefer executors, tasks, and streams to threads</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev81">Item 81: Prefer concurrency utilities to wait and notify</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev82">Item 82: Document thread safety</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev83">Item 83: Use lazy initialization judiciously</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch11.xhtml#lev84">Item 84: Don’t depend on the thread scheduler</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch12.xhtml#ch12">12 Serialization</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="ch12.xhtml#lev85">Item 85: Prefer alternatives to Java serialization</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch12.xhtml#lev86">Item 86: Implement Serializable with great caution</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch12.xhtml#lev87">Item 87: Consider using a custom serialized form</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch12.xhtml#lev88">Item 88: Write readObject methods defensively</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch12.xhtml#lev89">Item 89: For instance control, prefer enum types to readResolve</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="ch12.xhtml#lev90">Item 90: Consider serialization proxies instead of serialized instances</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="app.xhtml#app">Items Corresponding to Second Edition</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ref.xhtml#ref">References</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="index.xhtml#index">Index</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch2_images.xhtml#ch2_images">Code Snippets</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="preface.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../../4bgup-l038f.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="ch1.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
